
JDK installation consists of       
1. JRE -> Java runtime environment 
2. JVM -> Java virtual machine

JDK Consists of -> JRE consists of -> JVM



JDK : Everything you need to develop Java programs
It contains things like:
-javac → Java compiler
-java → launches/runs Java programs
-JRE-related components
-debugging and development tools


JRE = Everything needed to run Java applications
JRE = JVM + Java libraries + runtime components


JVM : Actual engine that runs Java bytecode
Takes .class bytecode and executes it on your operating system/CPU

.class files are platform independent files , these files can run on any machine that have JVM 


Who makes .class files ?
javac -> compiles .java code to .class bytecode 


What is interpreting and compiling?
These are two ways for code to run

- Interpreting ->  Executing a code one line at a time 
                   Read one line -> transalte it to machine code -> run it -> forget it 
                   If this line gets repeated in a loop -> it will get translated to machine code everytime -> no memory for previous translations

        
        def greet():
            print("Hello")
            print("How are you")

        print("Start")
        greet()
        print("End")


Line-by-line interpreter flow:
1.Interpreter reads def greet(): → sees it's a function definition → stores the function (name greet, and its body) in memory. Does not run print("Hello") or print("How are you") yet. Just moves on.
2.Interpreter reaches print("Start") → this is real top-level code → executes immediately → prints Start
3.Interpreter reaches greet() → this is a call → now it jumps into the stored function body → runs print("Hello") → runs print("How are you") → function ends → jumps back to where it was called from
4.Interpreter reaches print("End") → executes → prints End




- Compilation -> translating your entire source code into machine code (or some lower-level code) before the program ever runs. 
                 You get a separate output file, and that file is what actually executes






JIT — Just-In-Time Compiler : It is a middle ground between both interpreter and compiler 
1.Program starts running as interpreted (line by line). 
2.While it's running, the JIT watches which parts of the code are being executed a lot (called "hot" code — e.g. a loop that runs 10,000 times). 
3.Once it spots hot code, it compiles just that part into fast machine code, on the fly, "just in time," and swaps it in.
4.Cold code (run once or twice) stays interpreted — no point wasting time compiling it.
5.Done by the JVM's JIT compiler



Flow of running a Java code?
1. Write code and save as .java
2. javac <filename>.java  -> compile the .java  file to   .class (bytecode : this is not native machine level code for CPU)
3. bytecode instruction file are understandable by JVM only
4. bytecode file is interpreted line by line by JVM and converted to machine code and run 
5. during interpretation code that repeats the most is converted to machine code by JIT and replaced , thereafter machine code is always used instead of interpreting it again


Why not just compile directly to machine code?
Because Java's bytecode is designed to be platform-independent.


Java isn't simply an "interpreted language." It's a combination of bytecode compilation + interpretation + JIT compilation